Writing Custom Functions Chapter (#40)
fhdsl/Tools_for_Reproducible_Workflows_in_R: 11-functions.Rmd

ottrpal::set_knitr_image_path()
```

> ```{r, fig.align='center', fig.alt = "Learning objectives are to be able to: Recognize when it is appropriate to make a custom function to aid in the reproducibility of an analysis. Create functions that are reproducible and useable by others. What aspects of a function make them useable by others. Well documented. Follow a style. Properly engineered", out.width="100%", echo = FALSE}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```{r, fig.align='center', fig.alt = "Learning objectives are to be able to: Recognize when it is appropriate to make a custom function to aid in the reproducibility of an analysis. Use a template to create functions that are reproducible and useable by others. Discuss what aspects of a function make them useable by others. Well documented. Follow a style. Properly engineered", out.width="100%", echo = FALSE}
```

Reviewer: Turning the last one into an action verb and adding info about the template. (I adjusted the slide too). We can update if you don't like the phrasing though!

Reviewer: could add another objective about reusing functions within and across projects - if we decide to add more about that.

Reviewer: for across projects, we could just link out to creating packages (unless you have a different idea for that)

ottrpal::include_slide("https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1MNHf8JpolaEP_vQ_kB-1xRBF9wo3haCArRu117hBoHA/edit#slide=id.g21a84b32106_0_53")
```

### Recognize when to write a custom function

There's a lot of reasons writing your own custom functions might be a thing you need to do. Here we will discuss two of the major reasons.

#### Cutting down on repetitive code

> We've discussed how DRY code is easier to maintain and understand! It is easier to fix code in one place as opposed to three or more places. A general guideline is that if you need two use a same chunk of code more than twice you probably should invest the time to make a custom function for it.

Reviewer: Might be good to put a dictionary box for people in case they forget what DRY code means... if we don't already have one from the previous chapters maybe we can put one in both places?

Reviewer: I made one below... I found that you did make one earlier - this version explains in a more function related way so maybe that is good :P

Author: How about linking to that section? I think I like that better?

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

:::dictionary
The word dry in DRY code stands for Do Not Repeat. The idea is that avoiding repeated sections can make it easier to maintain or troubleshoot. If you have an error from something that is repeated, it can be hard to pinpoint exactly where the error is occurring and why!
:::
```

Author: Oh you already made this. I guess both link and dictionary is good!

Reviewer: works for me!

> ```{r, fig.align='center', fig.alt = "The parrot is saying 'I’m using this code chunk three times. Updating this might get hairy… Good time to make a custom function!' The computer has three identical chunks of code on the screen.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```{r, fig.align='center', fig.alt = "The parrot is saying 'I’m using this code chunk three times. Updating this might get hairy… Good time to make a custom function!' The computer has three identical chunks of code on the screen.", out.width="100%", echo = FALSE}
```

Reviewer: This one was not rendering... I think because of a new line

> ", out.width="100%", echo = FALSE}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

ottrpal::set_knitr_image_path()
```

```{r, fig.align='center', fig.alt = "Learning objectives are to be able to: Recognize when it is appropriate to make a custom function to aid in the reproducibility of an analysis. Create functions that are reproducible and useable by others. What aspects of a function make them useable by others. Well documented. Follow a style. Properly engineered", out.width="100%", echo = FALSE}
ottrpal::include_slide("https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1MNHf8JpolaEP_vQ_kB-1xRBF9wo3haCArRu117hBoHA/edit#slide=id.g21a84b32106_0_53")
```

### Recognize when to write a custom function

> There's a lot of reasons writing your own custom functions might be a thing you need to do.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There's a lot of reasons writing your own custom functions might be a thing you need to do. Here we will discuss two of the major reasons.
```

", out.width="100%", echo = FALSE}
ottrpal::include_slide("https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1MNHf8JpolaEP_vQ_kB-1xRBF9wo3haCArRu117hBoHA/edit#slide=id.g341450bc187_100_5")
```

#### More readable code

Custom functions can allow you to organize code into manageable chunks.
By creating custom functions it can be easier to organize our code in a way thats more readable.

### Writing a function

A common way that a custom function might come about is:

1. You've written some initial code that takes some object as input.
2. You now realize you will need to run this series of code more than twice.

#### Starting a new function

To get started with writing a new function, you can follow these steps to make a custom function:

1. Open up a new R script file to copy and paste our basic template we have below.
```
#' Title here
#'
#' @description This is what the function does
#'
#' @param arg1 A first argument
#' @param arg2 A second argument
#'
#' @return What is returned
#' @export
#'
#' @examples
#'
#' function(arg1, arg2)
#'
#'
function_name <- function(arg1, arg2) {

    # Your main code here

    return(output)
}
```

> Your basic custom function is going to follow this type of structure:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your basic custom function is going to follow this type of structure.
```

> We will walk through how to use this template here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

Reviewer: probably don't need this since you describe it just below

> This top part of the template is the documentation. It's formatted in a way that would

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This top part of the template is the documentation. It's formatted in a way that would allow you to incorporate it into a package later if desired.
```

Reviewer: just adjusting for readability and adding to the same line

> allow you to incorporate it into a package if you would like.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer: was on a different line - see above

2. It's likely you might already have some code drafted that has some of the code you need for your function. Paste this code in the part of this template that says `# Your main code here`.

> 3.  Let's write a `@description` field. Describe the goal of the function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Next, fill out the `@description` field by replacing "This is what the function does". Describe the goal of the function.
```

Reviewer: adding some more detail

> 4. Next you'll likely want to sculpt your code, carefully thinking about its usage  and what types of options may need to be controlled by those who will use this function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Next you'll likely want to sculpt your code, carefully thinking about its usage  and what types of options may need to be controlled by those who will use this function. This may require some adjustments to arguments and default values.
```

Reviewer: adding some more details

ottrpal::include_slide("https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1MNHf8JpolaEP_vQ_kB-1xRBF9wo3haCArRu117hBoHA/edit#slide=id.g21a84b32106_0_53")
```

### Recognize when to write a custom function

There's a lot of reasons writing your own custom functions might be a thing you need to do. Here we will discuss two of the major reasons.

#### Cutting down on repetitive code

We've discussed how [DRY code](https://hutchdatascience.org/Tools_for_Reproducible_Workflows_in_R/reproducible-code.html#is-dry-dont-repeat-yourself) is easier to maintain and understand! It is easier to fix code in one place as opposed to three or more places. A general guideline is that if you need two use a same chunk of code more than twice you probably should invest the time to make a custom function for it.

> :::dictionary

Reviewer: ```suggestion
::: {.dictionary}
```

Reviewer: oops sorry about that :P

```{r, fig.align='center', out.width="100%", echo = FALSE, fig.alt= "Major point!! example image"}
ottrpal::include_slide("https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1MNHf8JpolaEP_vQ_kB-1xRBF9wo3haCArRu117hBoHA/edit#slide=id.g21a84b32106_0_53")
```

> ### Why write a custom function?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Recognize when to write a custom function
```

There's a lot of reasons writing your own custom functions might be a thing you need to do.

#### Cutting down on repetitive code

> We've discussed how DRY code is easier to maintain and understand! It is easier to fix code in one place as opposed to three or more places. A general guideline is that if you need two use a same chunk of code more than twice you probably should invest the time to make a custom function for it.

Reviewer: a visual?

Author: Added a cartoon!

#### More readable code

Custom functions can allow you to organize code into manageable chunks.
By creating custom functions it can be easier to organize our code in a way thats more readable.

### Writing a function

A common way that a custom function might come about is:

1. You've written some initial code that takes some object as input.
2. You now realize you will need to run this series of code more than twice.

> To get started you can follow these steps to make a custom function:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

Reviewer: moving this down

> ### Starting a new function

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Starting a new function
```

> ### Starting a new function

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Starting a new function
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get started with writing a new function, you can follow these steps to make a custom function:

```

> Open up a new R script file and copy and paste our basic template we have below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Open up a new R script file to copy and paste our basic template we have below.
```

Your basic custom function is going to follow this type of structure:

We will walk through how to use this template here.

This top part of the template is the documentation. It's formatted in a way that would
allow you to incorporate it into a package if you would like.

> 1. It's likely you might already have some code drafted that has some of the code you need for your function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. It's likely you might already have some code drafted that has some of the code you need for your function. Paste this code in the part of this template that says `# Your main code here`.
```

> paste this code in the part of this template that says `# Your main code here`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ```

Reviewer: could we move the template up to right after we say open a new script

Author: Done!

#' Title here
#'
#' @description This is what the function does
#'
#' @param arg1 A first argument
#' @param arg2 A second argument
#'
#' @return What is returned
#' @export
#'
#' @examples
#'
#' function(arg1, arg2)
#'
#'
function_name <- function(arg1, arg2) {

    # Your main code here

    return(output)
}
```

> 2. First let's write a `@description` field. What is this function's goal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3.  Let's write a `@description` field. Describe the goal of the function.
```

> 3. Next you'll likely want to sculpt your code, carefully thinking about its usage  and what types of options may need to be controlled by those who will use this function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Next you'll likely want to sculpt your code, carefully thinking about its usage  and what types of options may need to be controlled by those who will use this function.
```

}
```

#### Using your custom functions

Now that you've created your custom functions there are a few ways you can load it in so it can be used by other notebooks and scripts. Depending on the situation you'll want to pick either `source`ing the script or creating an `R package`.

> - `source()` - This is most straightforward option. You can put this at the top of your notebook or script. It just involves you pointing to the script that holds your custom functions: `source(file/path/here.R)`. This is good for if you are going to reuse these custom functions mostly within one project. But may not be ideal if

Reviewer: ```
- `source()` - This is most straightforward option. To do this can put this at the top of your notebook or script. It just involves you pointing to the script that holds your custom functions: `source(file/path/custom_functions_file.R)`. This option is good if you are going to reuse these custom functions mostly within one project. However, it may not be ideal if you want to use your function across multiple projects. 
```

> - `source()` - This is most straightforward option. You can put this at the top of your notebook or script. It just involves you pointing to the script that holds your custom functions: `source(file/path/here.R)`. This is good for if you are going to reuse these custom functions mostly within one project. But may not be ideal if

Reviewer: ```
- `source()` - This is most straightforward option. You can put this at the top of your notebook or script. It just involves you pointing to the script that holds your custom functions: `source(file/path/here.R)`. This is good for if you are going to reuse these custom functions mostly within one project. But may not be ideal if

```

> - `source()` - This is most straightforward option. You can put this at the top of your notebook or script. It just involves you pointing to the script that holds your custom functions: `source(file/path/here.R)`. This is good for if you are going to reuse these custom functions mostly within one project. But may not be ideal if

Reviewer: I think this got cut off

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `source()` - This is most straightforward option. It just involves you pointing to the script that holds your custom functions: `source(file/path/file_with_functions.R)`   at the top of your notebook or script. This is good if you are going to reuse these custom functions mostly within one project. This may not be ideal if you want to reuse your functions across different projects. 
```

> - `an R package` If you will be using your custom functions in multiple projects you might not want to use a script because it may result in you having to make unwieldy file paths or copies of that script, neither of which are ideal for long term maintenance. Instead you may consider creating an R package for this custom function and any related ones you may make. Take a look at this resource for [how to get started making a package](https://tinyheero.github.io/jekyll/update/2015/07/26/making-your-first-R-package.html).

Reviewer: idk why but I apparently need to make a comment to be able to do a suggestion :P

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `an R package` If you will be using your custom functions in multiple projects you might not want to use a script because it may result in you having to make unwieldy file paths or copies of that script, neither of which are ideal for long term maintenance. Instead you may consider creating an R package for one or more custom functions. Take a look at this resource for [how to get started making a package](https://tinyheero.github.io/jekyll/update/2015/07/26/making-your-first-R-package.html).
```
